---
title: The Iron Lung
summary: A man discovers a language that changes the world.
---

He sought to recreate the great palindrome poem of Su Hui, a matrix of Chinese
logograms twenty-nine characters tall and wide, which afforded hundreds of
distinct readings: in every direction, within symmetrical internal regions, and
along its outer perimeter. Finding his native language and its alphabet lacking,
he set out to create his own. He wanted a language for writing regular poems on
arbitrary rectangular grids, which could be read in every direction.

He abandoned his first attempt at the language once its script exceeded six
hundred ideograms.

His second attempt was no more fruitful: his alphabet was smaller, but each
character was extensively overloaded. The same symbol which, read
left-from-right, stood for 'labyrinth', a top-to-bottom reading turned to
'doorway'. This unnecessary restriction bound the nature and quality of his
sentences: all left-to-right sentences were alike, as were all right-to-left
sentences and those of all other directions.

Having found no way out of the cul-de-sac, he abandoned this second language
understanding that it's not words, but their conjunction, that carry meaning.

His third attempt was a success.

These symbols were not spun from the aether, their shapes were the geometric
conjunction of smaller characters, each a single stroke, each a symbol in an
alphabet of conceptual primitives, like the calculus Leibniz saw but never
described. His new characters formed natural families and categories, and were
amenable to mathematical probing: during a brief digression, he discovered an
encoding of his script into the integers under which all syntactically valid
square poems were invertible matrices.

His first success was a simultaneous translation of Borges in the form of a
column, six hundred and thirteen characters tall: a top-to-bottom reading
revealed _The Aleph_, the reverse, _The Zahir_.

To prove the merit of his language beyond haikus and brief stories, his next
labour was a translation of the Iliad. Read top to bottom as a boustrophedon --
alternating left-to-right and right-to-left directions -- it was the story of
the sack of Ilium. Other directions offered new facets of the epic.

He was tempted, many times, to extend his work into three dimensions and beyond,
creating a new language to write cubic poems that could be read across a new
axis. He never pursued this, choosing instead to focus on composing poetry using
the language he already had. He decided to stop working on the language and to
start using it.

He was disturbed by dreams of inhabiting an infinite sequence of regular
tetrahedra which, impossibly (unnervingly) tiled all of space. Their faces were
immaterial and inscribed with golden characters. Most were unfamiliar to him,
but some he identified as a divining script, whose characters were etched on
bones. Their combustion divined the future. Wakefulness relieved him of this
sacred knowledge: he soon forgot the shapes of the characters.

On the day of his fifty-sixth birthday his sister visited him and left, on his
nightstand, a potted plant to keep him company. He wrote the detailed account of
that day, as if in a journal, in the form of a matrix seventy-seven characters
tall and broad. At night, he read it. He read it again, in another direction
where the trail of characters for _plant_ became _flower_. He awoke the next day
to a bouquet of yellow flowers[<sup>1</sup>](#foot) in a many-faceted glass vase.

Spurred by this good omen, he repeated his experiments and gradually filled his
room with beautiful things. Not content to limit his experiments to mere
addition, he sought to translate his surroundings.

He interviewed, by correspondence, old and current doctors and nurses and
functionaries of the hospital. Within a year we had written as detailed an
account of the hospital as any professional historian. He translated it to his
language, taking care that the many orderings of its characters represented
affine transformations of the hospital through space. The next morning, the view
beyond his window of a bare concrete wall was transformed into an ocean. Night
by night he rotated the hospital, his vantage point scanning the landscape like
the beam of a lighthouse. Many times he changed its flag.

He then devised his miraculous plan.

He saw it racing towards his mind's eye: indescribably large, mutiply
symmetrical, self-similar, transected by overlapping cycles like the birds of
Escher. The composition of the poem would take the remaining decades of his
life, a careful navigation of its structures would abolish the hospital, the
iron lung, his old age.

He set out to write the complete account of his life.

1. <a id="foot"> _Ficaria verna_.

---

I wrote this in 2017, I think. But I have only shared it privately with one friend.

© 2021 Fernando Borretti. Released under the [CC BY-NC-SA 4.0][license] license.

[license]: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
