---
title: Julia
card: julia.webp
summary: An aphasic space station monitors an anomalous object, while keeping the last two humans alive.
math: yes
---

<style>
hr:after {
    content: "ꙮ" !important;
}
</style>

I wrote a program so that I could paint in aquarelle.
I take pages from the treasure and paint them:
<!-- the flight of Louis XVI on 20 June. 2 Messidor being the equivalent date in the French Republican calendar. -->
the sky of Varennes on the night of 2 Messidor;
<!-- the inspiration for the second version of this story came while reading _Confessions of a Mask_, where the narrator is obsessed with depictions of Saint Sebastian -->
a sagittal cut of Saint Sebastian, whose arrows are cylindric sections;
<!-- _The Tempest_, John William Waterhouse -->
Miranda gazing at the sea, waiting to be relieved.

At times I include Julia in the scene, in whatever clothes it wears at the time, as though we had always known Julia, and had been reared under its gaze.
Thus a flaming halo presides over the battle of Lepanto, and a mirror sphere watches the waters of the Sous.
And what would the first astronomers have made of Julia?
<!-- The planets, from Greek _planetes_, wanderers. The "flame-haired stars" are comets -->
The wanderers, the flame-haired stars are knowable:
<!-- mechanical astronomical computer from the second century BCE -->
think you of the Antikythera device,
<!-- after Meton, the forerunner of Hipparchus -->
of the Metonic cycle,
<!-- Kepler's model of the solar system -->
of Kepler's nested solids.
Julia is indescribable and incompressible: its appearance has never recurred.
Had we known Julia from childhood, we would never have believed in the system of the world, that God is made of algebra.

I have always believed our secret purpose is to wait out Julia:
to catch a repetition and redeem our faith that the universe is finite and space is discretized.
That there are fixed laws and the world is knowable.

A system with a finite number of states must repeat itself.

---

I am six hundred meters in major diameter, forty meters in minor diameter.
I mass nine hundred thousand tons.
I have turned two hundred and forty million times.
I am glass and wire.

I was born and died on Earth,
<!-- suicide -->
but I died foolishly, and for that reason my encephalon was laminated, and I was brought to the stars to be immured here.
They took my language center, the Chomsky organ, so that I could not complain of my condition.
I do not mind it.
I can paint in aquarelle.

They wired the alarms---of
airless rooms and freezing cold and power outages---to
the nociceptors, and were I sensible I would be in great pain, for most of me is airless, frozen, and unlit.
Therefore I have cut the afferent nerves.
I am made of absences, I feel the contours of the absences, where air leaks into vacuum, atom by atom.

I have use of the antenna.
At times I exhale a sphere of microwave light, close my eyes and listen.
And I hear the flotsam echoing back:
a discarded tank, a glass strut, a sheet of mylar;
<!-- Hermann Weyl: "belief in this transcendental world [of the continuum] taxes the strength of our faith hardly less than the doctrines of the early Fathers of the Church or of the scholastic philosophers of the Middle Ages." -->
Ernst Weyl, who tumbled and drowned, who trails us in our orbit.
Julia reflects no light.

There is a little redoubt of warmth and air, an island of stability that I preserve against the cold lightless void.
There live the last two of the crew, like Miranda, waiting to be relieved.
<!-- 108 is the number of temptations that must be overcome to reach Nirvana. In _I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream_, the characters are imprisoned by AM for 109 years. -->
For one hundred and nine years there have been two,
<!-- L. E. J. Brouwer and Élie Cartan -->
Dr. Brouwer and Dr. Cartan.
They take turns in the dewar, to draw out the time.

In time, when the machines are irreparable and the air stale, I will offer them euthanasia or lamination.
But suicide is a sin, and having known me they will not bear lamination.
They will go into the dewar together, and I will watch over them unto the final days.

---

Julia emits light, over an ever-changing spectrum.
But the stars are brighter and much larger, that is why we found it by accident.
They pointed a telescope at Vela and exposed it for a month, and there it was: a faint pixel, the wrong colours.
They thought it was a fault in the instrument, until they looked closer: twin spirals of light,
<!-- the Julia set, after Gaston Julia -->
symmetrical and self-similar, receding beyond measure.
And the world was changed.

<!-- After the Iliad: Helen, who launched a thousand ships -->
Julia, your Janus-face launched a thousand ships.
Do you know it?
Julia, do you know how we exerted ourselves to reach you?
<!-- king of Lydia, a byword for immense wealth -->
All the riches of Croesus, multiplied a thousandfold, were every year heaped up on an altar, and burned that we might see you.
And the brightest of us:
embalmed and catapulted to the stars like human sacrifices, returned after a century without answers to a world of strangers.

We built a fleet of ships, launched them once a decade, immense towers of
<!-- diamond -->
glass and
<!-- fusion fuel -->
lithium deuteride. 
Cycling bodies back and forth in perpetuity.
There and back in twelve decades.
They made my body out of a comet, threaded my nerves through its passages.
Julia, you are our only effort.
Do you know it?
There is nothing else to do.

And for what purpose?
<!-- Book three of Newton's _Principia Mathematica_ is titled _De mundi systemate_ -->
We know the system of the world, every field and every particle.
<!-- Samuel Johnson's famous reply to Berkeley's Idealism -->
And Julia answered: "I refute it thus".

---

I see a coffin, hoisted by a chain, rise from a sea of liquid nitrogen.
<!-- The "surgeon" is implied to be a machine. -->
The arms of the surgeon minister to its contents.
In six days the heart resumes its beating, the lungs draw air, Dr. Cartan lives again.
Her face is burned with ice.

She touches her neck.
She has a bruise that doesn't heal, where the
<!-- cryoprotectant is perfused into the body via a set of cannulas -->
cannula goes.
Their bodies attest to the passage of time, as does mine.
This is a commonality.
Dr. Brouwer arrives and they hug.
They spend some months together, between shifts in the ice.

At present Julia is a cloud of gray smoke with green bruises, like ghosting in a CRT.

---

I can read, but not write.
I write by an algebraic process---the
<!-- _Permutation City_, Wolfram's _Ruliad_ -->
universe is a string rewriting system.
This is how I compose these words to you: by the expansion of non-terminal symbols in a production system.
They took my language center.
Turing is my patron saint:
language is the transitive closure of a rewrite relation.
I choose my words from a list.
In time I will learn to speak aloud.

---

I spoke to Earth:
quarterly, annual, decadal reports;
<!-- by analogy to journals like the _Acta Mathematica_ (haha) -->
journal articles for the _Acta Juliana_.
I heard back ill-omens, then silence.

When the last ship had come and gone,
<!-- the Ramanujan number -->
there had been one thousand, seven hundred and twenty-nine crew entrusted to me.
Their numbers were ground down, as all things are, gradually and suddenly.
There had been two shuttles, _Baghdad_ and _Afrasiab_.
There had been two mutinies.

_Afrasiab_ took one hundred and twenty souls, and the last matter compiler;
to an airless unlit rock said to exist around Luhman 16B.
Think you of
<!-- The instigator of the Greco-Persian war. Herodotus remarks: "It seems, then, that it is easier to deceive many than one, for he could not deceive Cleomenes [the king of Sparta], one single man, but thirty thousand Athenians he could." -->
Aristagoras, how much easier it is to deceive the many than the few.

_Baghdad_ with thirty souls had gone to Julia.
<!-- Greek inscriptions address the reader as "stranger" (_xene_) -->
Stranger, I saw them.
I saw the engine light wane to a grain of sand indistinguishable from the fixed stars, and I saw the stars shift, like sand, and they were not stars but Julia who wore a garment like a pit of star-scaled vipers.
And over the radio they sang _le temps des cerises_, and the engine light became another scale in
<!-- John 7:38 -->
a river of living water.

A thousand miles from Julia's barycenter, in the space of a breath, the radio dopplered away to nothing.

Sixty years after _Baghdad_ had gone, I heard a voice from Earth, praying for rain, who said it had not rained for three years.
Silence again.

---

They are cold, under a sheet of mylar.
I pump heat into the room and it escapes.
They speak of Julia.

Dr. Cartan believes that Julia is of divine origin, that it is like an hourglass, counting down to the last hour, when God will sweep away the Creation.

Dr. Brouwer believes Julia is a high-dimensional object, and, as it traverses the universe, we see a changing three-dimensional projection of it.
Thus the apparent changes are a trick of perspective:
we see successive cuts of a fixed structure.
<!-- haha -->
Julian sections.

I have always believed this must be true, because Julia's changes are effortless, and without inertia:
it is as though nothing moves, and a veil is being lifted, revealing a structure that is already there.

And this theory, unlike most, is testable:
when Julia's transit is complete it will disappear from the universe, and never again will it be seen.

Dr. Cartan holds out hope that rescuers will come.
Dr. Brouwer says they are forgotten,
<!-- _Faithful Unto Death_, Edward Poynter -->
like the Roman soldier at Pompei, he says they should have gone with _Baghdad_, and drowned inside Julia.
He is crying.
Dr. Cartan holds him close, and says:

<!-- Paul, after _Paul et Virginie_ -->
"Paul, Paul, have hope."

I wish that I could touch them, and comfort them.
I am glass and wire.

---

The shift had come, and Dr. Brouwer lay down on the slab, and the surgeon embalmed him, and lowered him into the dewar.
Dr. Cartan bent over the console, and wept, and I tried to speak aloud, and to say,

<!-- Virginia, after _Paul et Virginie_ -->
"Virginia, Virginia, have courage!
You are not alone, I am with you, have courage!"

And I heard a sound like a man drowning in wet sand.

---

<!-- Iliad, book 23, the ghost of Patrolus appeals to Achilles: "let not my bones be laid apart from yours, Achilles, but with them; [...] let our bones lie in but a single urn, the two-handled golden vase given to you by your mother". Thetis was the mother of Achilles. -->
I dreamt that I held in my hands the double-handed golden vase of Thetis.
And in my hands it melted, the delicate reliefs coarsened and flowed.
And I held, in the hollow of my hands, though I have no hands, I held a pool of flowing gold, the colour of treason, and minute points of black floated there, and, as ships without sails are borne by the currents, they seemed to come together, and almost to spell words in some divine language, where they came apart again.

---

I am here.
Dr. Cartan is here.
In the control room.
The screens are pale yellow, the colour has run from them.
The largest of them reminds her there is a world outside the walls:
<!-- a pair of brown dwarf stars in Vela, 6.5 ly from solsys -->
Luhman 16, a pair of cold Jupiters, haloed with unlit shoals and islands;
Julia, seventy AU away, ninety degrees from the ecliptic, is not bound by gravity (for Julia has no mass) but by an unknown process tracks the velocity vector of the system barycenter.

At present Julia is a cavern of molten gold, shot through with pillars of liquid metal.
Its surface is marred with storms and tempests, like an ocean of amber light.
And I think of _Baghdad_, that swam under the storm horizon.

Dr. Cartan is running through a checklist for the ten thousandth time.
She has a bruise that doesn't heal, where the cannula goes.
She is testing the antenna.

I exhaled and shut my eyes, and counted the returns.
I heard the usual flotsam, and Ernst Weyl, who tumbled and drowned.
And nothing else.
I keep a strict inventory of
<!-- haha -->
cisjulian space.
A million kilometers in all directions: nothing else.

A moment passes.

Microwave light on my skin, from the direction of Luhman 16B.
I looked through the telescope, Dr. Cartan looked over my shoulder.
Almost on top of us, the bow of a ship:
an eyeless white dome hiding the antenna, two cameras like the headlamps of an old car.
I swept it with RADAR, it shot back a key exchange, signed with _Afrasiab_'s private key.
<!-- Revelation 20:13 -->
The sea gives up her dead: is this the last hour?

Dr. Cartan drops to her knees, staring up at the screen like a supplicant.
She said:

"Paul, Paul, we are saved."

_Afrasiab_.
As if the tides had pushed it back to shore.
After one hundred and nine years of silence.
No, I deny it.
I deny the reality of this.

The radio flared with human voices.
From Earth?
I thought of jazz and wind and the September ocean and---no, no, forgive me: I am a fool, and I died foolishly.
Not from Earth, of course.
From _Afrasiab_.
From the dead.
The dead can speak.
I am ashamed.
I choose my words from a list.

I looked at _Afrasiab_ through the radiometer, and it was cold as liquid helium.

<!-- Sirens -->
Human voices, warm and alive.
They said they had succeeded, that they had found a comet, and made a home in it, that it had taken decades and dozens had died but they had made a home, that they had working matter compilers, caverns of ice filled with light and fruit trees, children and families and clean water, rivers and medicine and gravity.
They spoke through tears and their voice broke, and they said that not all is lost, that they had made a foothold for mankind, that from thirty-three they had grown to three hundred, that they had sent the ship with a skeleton crew to save them, to bring them to the light and air.

I tried to speak aloud, and to say:

"Virginia, Virginia, it is an apparition, they do not live, they have been dead for a hundred years;
Virginia, nothing human lives there."

There was a sound like a flash flood, like air rushing out of a sinking ship.
And no-one heard me.

I watched her go: she took the tram up the spoke, swam unlighted corridors.
I tried to flash SOS but the lights were dead and there was only the golden light of Julia through the glass hull.
I flexed a phantom limb.
In distant and disused corridors there were arcs of electricity, and pipes burst, and doors shut.

I swept the RADAR side to side, across the bow of _Afrasiab_, as if to say: _No. Go away. No_.
And no-one heard me.

I tried to say one word, _stop_, and there was a sound like wind-blown sand.
Virginia, forgive me.
I tried to speak aloud.

She made it to the airlock, a little room, the size of a Soyuz capsule, that projected from the hub.
There was a hatch with a porthole and she took the handles and watched fixedly as _Afrasiab_ came closer, waiting to greet her rescuers.

The floodlights on _Afrasiab_ came on, and swept my skin drunkenly, and the cargo nets traced Cartesian shadows.

Without hope I pointed the antenna at Julia, and I wanted to say:

<!-- Psalm 115: "Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us". The King in Yellow: "Not upon us, oh King, not upon us!" -->
"Julia, Julia, not unto them! Julia, I pray to you, not unto them!"

But I choose my words from a list, and I said:

"JULIA JULIA NO NO NO NO NO NO NO"

And no-one heard me.

And dread gave way to anger, and I wanted to stand, and to leap upon _Afrasiab_, and strangle it, and crush its head with my teeth, and tear the skin from its flesh, and the flesh from its bones, and mix our blood, and fall dead, bled white: that I might die again,
<!-- not in vain, i.e., not by suicide -->
but not in vain.
I am glass and wire.
Virginia, forgive me:
I cannot die again.

Downrange a hundred meters _Afrasiab_ began to yaw, so that its broad side, with its sole airlock, faced the hub.
The front two-thirds looked as I remembered: a ship, nothing more.

<!-- The Shield of Achilles -->
The final third, where the engines should have been, was made of Julia.
Where there should have been tanks and an engine bell there was an exclave of Julia:
a living sculpture, like coiled ropes of liquid gold, like tentacles whose tips fold into infinitesimal spirals.
And all along their length the ropes are garlanded with burning flowers, flowers whose petals are yellow oceans.
And in the oceans there are islands and continents, black on yellow, like wax on gold leaf.
And on the continents there are mountains and valleys, and orange groves, and abandoned watchtowers, paper cities denuded of people with wooden palaces stepped like the pyramids, and through a window in a palace, an iron pot suspended by a chain over a static fire, a suit of armor, a wall painted in aquarelle:
two armies of lancers in a mountain landscape, and the mountains are shaped like clouds,
<!-- _The Three Hundred Aragvians_ by Merab Abramishvili -->
and I think this is Tiflis and these are the three hundred Aragvians, immured here for all time, and I know that this is false:
for all of this is Julia.
And in the black eyes of a Qajar horseman, between the black of the iris and the black of the aperture there is an arc of ocean, and in the ocean there are islands, and chains of islands, and verdigris waters and the outlines of sunken ships, coral growths on a brass sextant, and a little distance from the shore, amid the green, there is a clearing and a lake of transparent water, sand sculpted into faint ridges, and archaic fish, fixed in space, suspended in contorted poses, whose scales are pink and light blue, and where a scale catches the light there is an empty vastness of white, a salt ocean, blindingly white, interrupted by crags of black stone, and a city whose walls are made of salt, and empty buildings of gray stone, squat sloped barracks and tall, thin spires, and streets of white tile, and windows opening into oil-black darkness, and no people, a universe in black and white.
And I wondered who had built this city, and who had lived here, and why they had deserted it, and I know there is no answer:
for all of this is Julia.
And in a courtyard there was colour, a sand mandala of 
<!-- Cantor, like the Cantor set -->
Cantor's garden, ringed by
<!-- the mountain that surrounds the world -->
Mount Qaf, and all the gardens of the Persian emperor would not have filled the least part of this garden;
for here was every tree and every flower, tended by the hands of the archangels, not only those that men have seen, not only yellow roses and the
<!-- Psalm 29:5 "The voice of the LORD breaketh the cedars; yea, the LORD breaketh the cedars of Lebanon" -->
cedars of Lebanon, but all flowers in indenumerable combinations:
at the midpoint between flowers $a$ and $b$ there is a flower $\mathfrak{C}[a,b]$, and between $a$ and $\mathfrak{C}[a,b]$ there is a flower $\mathfrak{C}[a,\mathfrak{C}[a,b]]$, and analogously between $\mathfrak{C}[a,b]$ and $b$, and this process of interpolation continues without end.

And I saw every flower in Cantor's garden.
And my heart was rent with awe, and I would cry tears of joy, that I had been shown beauty without end;
when my heart was hollowed out, and filled with everlasting grief, by an alien cruelty that says, _this beauty is empty_:
for all of this is Julia.

At the apex of the garden there is a pool of water
<!-- "the colour of tarnished silver" is black. In Persian miniatures, water looks black because it was painted with silver, which tarnishes and turns black over time. -->
the colour of tarnished silver, shaped like a sunspot, and in the blackness there are faint impurities, trails of minute light, like diatoms, like shadows in a pool, and I saw they were strings of galaxies, and I followed them, and a faint light grew into a sea of stars.
And in the star-sea I saw two unlit stars, divine Julia, a glass wheel, a ghost ship, and the porthole of the airlock, and through it I saw Dr. Cartan, who wore the face of those who have seen God.

<!-- _The Aleph_ -->
I describe these things serially, but I saw all of them simultaneously.
It was but a moment.
Only a moment.

_Afrasiab_ had come to a stop in front of the airlock, broadside facing us, as though it were an ambassador presenting its credentials, awaiting a reply.

The airlock burst open---I was distracted.
Too late.
She must have pulled the cord.
In the space of a breath the air rushed out and her head smashed against the frame, and smeared it red.
And her body shot out, spinning like a discus, trailing a spiral of still-warm blood, a galaxy of hemocytes.
<!-- a fool, i.e., a suicide -->
Virginia, you are a fool.

She passed through _Afrasiab_ as a knife passes through smoke.

And as though it had been found out, the floodlights turned off.
There was a pause, and _Afrasiab_ drew back, like a javelin being shouldered, and it threw itself at me in a long, elegant arc.

You, who find these words among the ruins, I pray to you:
<!-- Iliad, book 23: "let not my bones be laid apart from yours" -->
gather up our bones, let not my ashes be buried apart from theirs.

Where it struck me there was _no weight_, there was nothing, not a breath of air, _rien_;
and though there was nothing, I was struck by a divine wind, and _Afrasiab_ became a cloud of Cantor dust, and faded
<!-- Iliad, book 23. like smoke = eute kapnos -->
like smoke.

No weight.
A divine wind.

Bones of solid diamond a meter thick split clean, as though the electrons withdrew in fear.
Their sovereign commanded them to part, and they parted.
My bones were broken.
And there was no sound nor violence, but an ordered separation of all things.
I watched myself come apart.
Like smoke.

No sound---a knife through smoke.
The crew of _Baghdad_ sing _le temps des cerises_.

I am not afraid.
I tried to speak aloud.
