---
title: Say Less
math: On Prolog, slop, and the dream of Leibniz.
---

Instruct-finetuned LLMs have a [regularity][reg] of syntax and structure that
humans lack. It doesn't take long before you stop reading the text as text, and
this:

> Based on my physics knowledge, the SU(5) and SO(10) Grand Unified Theories
> predict that magnetic monopoles can catalyze baryon decay through the
> Callan-Rubakov effect. In these theories, magnetic monopoles contain colored
> components that can mediate baryon number violating processes, allowing
> protons and neutrons to decay in their presence at relatively high rates
> compared to the standard prediction for spontaneous proton decay.

Becomes this:

> PREP DET NOUN NOUN, DET NOUN NOUN CONJ NOUN ADJ NOUN NOUN VERB PREP NOUN NOUN
> PREP VERB NOUN NOUN PREP DET NOUN NOUN. PREP DET NOUN, NOUN NOUN VERB ADJ NOUN
> PREP PREP VERB NOUN NOUN VERB NOUN, VERB NOUN CONJ NOUN PREP VERB PREP DET
> NOUN PREP ADJ NOUN VERB PREP DET ADJ NOUN PREP ADJ NOUN NOUN.

Becomes this:

```
nounPhrase(Adj, Noun) :-
    adjective(Adj),
    noun(Noun).

prepPhrase(Prep, NP) :-
    preposition(Prep),
    nounPhrase(NP).

adjective(magnetic).
noun(theory).
preposition(through).
verb(decay).
...
```

Ideological text is like this. People's political beliefs are increasingly
correlated[^corr], so that if you know someone's views on abortion, you know
their views on e.g. the facticity of the Ukraine war with good
probability. Often I read the first sentence of a post, intuit the brainworms,
and close the tab. I've read enough. You have _Cognitophagus ædificiumseptimus_
and I have heard it speak before.

Non-fiction books are like this: every one feels like it was written by the same
person; a condescending, didactic voice; similar to the [voice of
authority][voi]. Every chapter begins with an inane anecdote, later tied to the
central point of the book. There's an almost mechanical process by which the
1500 word blog post the book should have been is expanded into a respectable and
publishable length.[^cain]

This is slop: text that is transparent, you see through it and to the
[production rules][prod] that created it. You turn the crank and words come out
of the mechanism. Most slop is written by humans, LLM slop is more visible
because the structure is so regular and crystalline you can't miss it.

And slop has given me a fresh appreciation for brevity. Not spartan Ikea prose,
just text that doesn't waste my time. A well-turned sentence, an evocative
metaphor, are as rivers in the desert: at last, text I could not have predicted!

Much of the time, as of late, I wish I could read not prose but [Prolog][pl]
programs. Leibniz had the [right idea][calc], but he had not the
[technology][synth].

# Footnotes

[^corr]: And this, too, is a kind of RLHF. Because we are online, and if you
    step out of line you are punished, and if you say the right words you are
    rewarded, and so everyone falls in line. A minority of radical enforces
    police the boundaries of speech, and rounds everyone up into a small number
    of basins, c.f. [Taleb][tlb].

[^cain]: The best book on productivity I read is David Cain's [_How To Do
    Things_][how]. It's 50 pages. It's all actionable information. And this is
    particularly valuable for a book on _how to do things_, because reading a
    book is in and of itself a task you can be bad at.

[calc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calculus_ratiocinator
[how]: https://davidcain.gumroad.com/l/howtodothings
[pl]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prolog
[prod]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Production_(computer_science)
[reg]: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.00211
[synth]: https://thesephist.com/posts/synth/
[tlb]: https://medium.com/incerto/the-most-intolerant-wins-the-dictatorship-of-the-small-minority-3f1f83ce4e15
[voi]: https://gwern.net/scaling-hypothesis#critiquing-the-critics
